#summary Setting some coding style rules

== Introduction ==

This document will discuss coding styles and offer information about the project relating the processes involved in coding.

== Technologies ==
We will be using the *C language* as defined in GNU standards http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/ and compile it with *GCC 4.2.3* under Linux Kernel 2.6.24-19-generic.

I will be developing under Kubuntu 8.04.1 i386 which is built on that kernel.

== Coding Style ==
Best choice of the moment is *Linux kernel coding style*, found at http://lxr.linux.no/linux/Documentation/CodingStyle.

There are a few small changes to it which I would like to experiment with:
 # avoid using any macros apart from constants: macros tend to complicate the readability of the code.
 # this coding style suggests 8 whitespace tabs, while others suggest using whitespace instead of tabbing. From my experience, 8 whitespace make it hell to read code in a virtual machine window. I propose to try for 4 whitespaces tabs. Need to work on this as we code.

== Folder Hierarchy ==
Each module should reside in his own separate folder, for now, as we are not aware of how many source files there will be present in each one:

|| 1. || Block Manager: || /src/block ||
|| 2. || Garbage Collector: || /src/garb ||
|| 3. || Wear Leveler: || /src/wear ||
|| 4. || Error Fixer: || /src/errfix ||
|| 5. || Compression System: || /src/zipper ||
|| 6. || Security System: || /src/sec ||

The documentation will contain several files, all in the same folder /svn/trunk/docs (http://project-soa.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/docs/)

If a module will be reduced to having just 1 source file, it will be taken into /src and the folder removed. For now, we are allowing a certain degree of complexity for the modules, therefore assigning each of them a separate folder.

== Documenting Sources ==
For documenting source code, best option seems to use *doxygen* system, after comparing it to the other available options: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_documentation_generators.

We will be using the latest doxygen release version 1.5.7.1, from 5 October 2008.

Each module will be documented separately by it's author in the source code, then the documentation will be generated in form of online HTML pages, stored in separate folders into /svn/trunk/docs bearing the same name as the module folder.
